You’re all going to have a lot of questions, but I want to focus on the issue today, the judiciary, as well as we were talking about the Attorney General’s office. And so I’ll have plenty of time to ask the questions I know you desperately want to ask about everything from 25th Amendment on, but I’m not going to speak to that today. I want this to be the issue that we focus on because I think it’s so important. Yesterday, in my view, one of the darkest days in the history of our nation, an unprecedented assault on our democracy. An assault, literally, on the citadel of liberty, on the United States Capitol itself. An assault on the rule of law. An assault on the most sacred of American undertakings, ratifying the will of the people in choosing the leadership of their government. All of us here grieve the loss of life, grieve the desecration of the people’s house. What we witnessed yesterday was not dissent. It was not disorder. It was not protest. It was chaos. They weren’t protesters. Don’t dare call them protesters. They were a riotous mob. Insurrectionists. Domestic terrorists. It’s that basic. It’s that simple. And I wish we could say we couldn’t see it coming, but that isn’t true. We could see it coming.
The past four years, we’ve had a president who’s made his contempt for our democracy, our constitution, the rule of law, clear in everything he has done. He unleashed an all-out assault on our institutions of our democracy from the outset. And yesterday was but the culmination of that unrelenting attack. He’s attacked the free press who dared to question his power, repeatedly calling the free press the enemy of the people. Language, at the time he first used it, I and others said has long been used by autocrats and dictators all over the world to hold onto power. The enemy of the people. Language that is being used now by autocrats and dictators across the world, only this time with the imperator of an outgoing President of the United States of America.
He’s attacked our intelligence services, who dare tell the American people the truth about the effort of a foreign power to elect him four years ago, choosing instead to believe the word of Vladimir Putin over the word of those who’ve sworn their allegiance to this nation, many of whom had risked their lives in the service of this nation.
He deployed the United States military, tear gassing peaceful protestors in pursuit of a photo opportunity in the service of his reelection, even holding the Bible upside down. The action that led to an apology from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and an outspoken denunciation of the use of military for domestic political purposes, from scores, scores of former military leaders and Secretaries of Defense, led by Secretary Cheney. He thought he could stack the courts with friendly judges who would support him no matter what, they were Trump judges, his judges. He went so far as to say he needed nine Justices on the Supreme court because he thought the election would end up in the Supreme Court and they would hand him the election.
He was stunned, truly stunned, when the judges he appointed didn’t do his bidding and instead acted with integrity, following the constitution, upholding the rule of law, not just once or twice or three times, but over 60 times. Let me say it, over 60 times. In more than 60 cases, in state after state after state, and then at the Supreme Court judges, including people considered “his judges”, Trump judges, to use his words, looked at the allegations that Trump was making determined they were without any merit.
Nothing was judged to put this election in question or doubt by any of these judges. You want to understand the importance of democratic institutions in this country, take a look at the judiciary in this nation. Take a look at the pressure it was just subjected to by a sitting president of the United States of America. At every level, the judiciary rose in the moment during this election, did its job, acted with complete fairness and impartiality, with complete honor and integrity. When history looks back in this moment that we’ve just passed through, I believe it will say our democracy survived in no small part because of the men and women who represent an independent judiciary in this nation. We owe them a deep, deep debt of gratitude.
And then there’s the attack on the Department of justice, treating the Attorney General as his personal lawyer and the department as his personal law firm. Through it all, we would hear the same thing from this president, my generals, my judges, my Attorney General. And then yesterday, a culmination of an attack on our institutions of democracy. This time, the Congress itself. Inciting a mob to attack the Capitol, to threaten the elected representatives of the people of this nation, and even the vice president, to stop the Congress from ratifying the will of the American people in a just, completed, free and fair election.
Trying to use a mob to silence the voices of nearly 160 million Americans who summoned the courage in the face of pandemic that threatened their health and their lives to cast that sacred ballot. I made it clear from the moment I entered this race that what I believe was at stake. I said there was nothing less at stake than who we are as a nation, what we stand for, what we believe, what we will be. At the center of that belief is one of the oldest principles this nation has long held, where our government of laws, not of men, not of the people, of laws. I said it many times in the campaign, our democratic institutions is not relics of another age, they’re what sets this nation apart. They’re the guardrails of our democracy. That’s why there is no president who is a King. No Congress that’s a House of Lords. A judiciary doesn’t serve the will of the president or exist to protect him or her. We have three co-equal branches of government. Co-equal. Our president is not above the law. Justice serves the people. It doesn’t protect the powerful. Justice is blind. What we saw yesterday, in plain view, was another violation of the fundamental tenet of this nation. Not only did we see the failure to protect one of the three branches of our government, we also saw a clear failure to carry out equal justice.
 used to say in the Senate, excuse a point of personal privilege. Well, over an hour and a half after the chaos started, I got a text from my granddaughter Finnegan Biden, who is a senior in her last semester at University of Pennsylvania. She sent me a photo of military people in full military gear, scores of them lining the steps of the Lincoln Memorial because of protest by Black Lives Matter. She said, “Pop, this isn’t fair.” No one can tell me that if it had been a group of Black Lives Matter protesting yesterday, they wouldn’t have been treated very, very differently than the mob of thugs that storm the Capitol. We all know that’s true and it is unacceptable. Totally unacceptable. The American people saw it in plain view. I hope it’s sensitizing what we have to do.
Not many people know it, when Justice Garland and I were talking, we talked about, I think he raised it. The reason for the Justice Department’s forming in the first place. It was back in 1870. We didn’t have a Justice Department before that cabinet. It was formed in 1870 to enforce the civil rights amendment that grew out of the Civil War. The 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments. To stand up to the Klan, to stand up to racism, to take on domestic terrorism. This original spirit must again guide and animate it’s work.
So as we stand here today, we do so in the wake of yesterday’s events, events that could not more have vividly demonstrated some of the most important work we have to do in this nation. Committing ourselves to the rule of law in this nation. Invigorating our domestic and democratic institutions. Carrying out equal justice under the law in America. There is no more important place for us to do this work than the Department of Justice that has been so politicized. There’s no more important people to carry out this work than the people I’m announcing today. More than anything, we need to restore the honor, the integrity, the independence of Department of Justice in this nation that has been so badly damaged. And so many former leaders of that department in both parties have so testified and stated that.
I want to be clear to those who lead this department, who you will serve. You won’t work for me. You are not the president or the vice president’s lawyer. Your loyalty is not to me. It’s to the law, the Constitution, the people of this nation, to guarantee justice. For Attorney General of the United States, I nominated a man of impeccable integrity, Judge Merrick Garland, one the most respected jurists of our time. Brilliant, yet humble. Distinguished, yet modest. Full of character and decency. The Supreme Court clerk served in the Justice Department during the Carter, Bush 41, and Clinton administrations, where he embraced the department’s core values of independence and integrity. A Federal prosecutor who took on terrorism and corruption and violent crime, always with the utmost professionalism and the duty to the oath he swore.
Nominated by President Clinton to be a judge on the DC Circuit Court of Appeals, considered the second most powerful court in America. Throughout such a long and distinguished career, Judge Garland has earned the praise and admiration of members of bench and bar, and politicians of both parties. And despite his busy schedule and prestigious positions, he still makes time to volunteer regularly, tutoring students in Northeast DC, as he’s done for 20 years. It’s about character. It’s about character.
… it’s about character, it’s about character. It was no surprise why President Obama nominated him, Judge Garland, to the Supreme Court. As I said he embodies honor, decency, integrity, fidelity to the rule of law and judicial independence. To those same traits, he will now bring as Attorney General of the United States, not as a personal attorney to the president, but as the peoples’ lawyer. He’ll restore trust in the rule of law and equal justice under the law. And I fully expect, in the discussions I’ve had, that he will receive a fair hearing and a swift confirmation. And once he’s confirmed, I will move promptly to nominate his replacement on the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals. I expect that the distinguished nominee will receive a prompt and fair hearing as well. For Deputy Attorney General, I nominate one of the most selfless people I’ve worked with, one of the brightest I’ve worked with. I worked with her during the last administration. A 15 year veteran of the Justice Department, Lisa Monaco. Lisa knows the department inside and out. She is a definition of what a public servant should be; decent, trusting, honorable. And I might add I embarrassed her a moment ago with her other colleagues, and selfless. I offered her other positions that are of “greater consequence,” more prestige. But she wanted to work with you, Judge. She wanted to go back to the Justice Department. A top  prosecutor, took on public corruption, corporate fraud and violent crime. Chief of Staff to the Director of the FBI. The first woman ever confirmed as Assistant Attorney General for National Security, where she elevated cyber security to a top priority. And where it’s even more consequential today, than it was then.
At the White House, she was the top Homeland Security and Counter Terrorism advisor to President Obama and me, at every one of the national security meetings. She coordinated our fight against Al-Qaeda and ISIL. She helped lead our response to the Ebola Crisis. When the bombs went off at the finish line on Patriot’s Day in Boston, her hometown, she coordinated the Federal Governments response with local and state law enforcement to get to the bottom of the horrible tragedy. Lisa, I know, I know you will help restore integrity and independence of the Department of Justice that you so revere.
As Associate Attorney General, the number three job at the department, I nominate Vanita Gupta. A woman I’ve known for sometime. One of the most respected Civil Rights lawyers in America. Started a career at the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. Then onto to ACLU, both organizations to which I belong. And then to the Justice Department during the Obama-Biden administration, where she led the Civil Rights Division. At every step, with every case, she fought for greater equity and the right to right the wrongs of a justice system, where they existed. And she’s done so by bringing people together, earning praise from across the  spectrum for her approach to solving some of the thorniest problems we face.
During the Obama-Biden administration, Vanita was put in charge of investigating the abuse of power in police departments in Ferguson, Missouri and other communities torn apart by acts of violence and racial injustice. She helped institute a common sense police reforms to build greater equity, safety, and trust. She was commended for her work by both law enforcement and those advocating for changes in the criminal justice system. That’s a rare achievement. And it speaks volumes about her capacity to unite people in common purpose, which is what this is all about. Uniting the American people.
Born in Pennsylvania, a proud daughter of immigrants from India, that sound familiar?
If confirmed, Vanita will be the first woman of color to serve as Associate Attorney General. And I’m grateful, I’m grateful that Vanita is leaving her current job, leading one of the premier Civil Rights organizations in the world, as she answers the call to serve once again to ensure that our justice system is even more fair, and more equitable. Thank you.
For Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights, I nominate Kristen Clarke who has spent her career advocating for greater equality and equity in our justice system. The daughter of Jamaican immigrants. Now don’t think this has been designed here. I’m still looking for an Irishman. All kidding aside, the daughter of Jamaican immigrants, Kristen is also one of the most distinguished Civil Rights Attorneys in America. A proud native of Brooklyn, New York, she began her legal career in the very same office she’s now nominated to lead. Her previous tenure with the Justice Department saw her take on some of the most complex Civil Rights cases, from voting rights, to redistricting challenges, to prosecuting hate crimes and human trafficking. She’s earned accolades throughout her career, including as the head of the Civil Rights Bureau for her home state of New York, where she’s led the charge to end the school to prison pipeline and root out discrimination in housing and in law enforcement. She currently leads one of the nations top Civil Rights organizations, where she promotes greater equity, and voting rights, in our education system, in our housing system, in our justice system, and so much more.
Now, she’ll return full circle to pursue the vital work where her career began. The Civil Rights division represents the moral center of the Department of Justice. And the heart of that fundamental American ideal that we’re all created equal and all deserve to be treated equally. I’m honored you accepted the call to return to make real the promise for all Americans.
To each of you, I thank you for your service, and to your families. And to the American people, this is a team that will restore your trust and faith in our institutions democracy. I chaired the judiciary committee for many years. One of my goals in running in the first place, you may recall, I said when I saw those people coming out of the fields on Charlottesville shouting hate, a young woman killed. And when asked the president said they there are good people on both sides. That’s literally why I ran. There’s no more important and heartfelt effort on my part than restoring, restoring the independence and integrity of our justice department.
So may God bless you all. May God protect our troops and those who are sworn to protect the American people. Now I will turn it over to the team, starting with the next Attorney General of the United States, Judge Merrick Garland. Thank you.
Are Sorry. Not just an inconvenience, but I’m sorry for the reason we’ve delayed, I’ve delayed coming out to speak to you. I initially was going to talk about the economy, but all of you, all of you have you been watching what I’ve been watching. At this hour, our democracy is under unprecedented assault, unlike anything we’ve seen in modern times, an assault the Citadel of Liberty, the Capitol itself, an assault on the people’s representatives and the Capitol Hill Police sworn to protect them, and the public servants who work at the heart of our Republic. An assault on the Rule of Law, like few times we’ve ever seen it. An assault on the most sacred of American undertakings, the doing of the people’s business.
Let me be very clear. The scenes of chaos at the Capitol do not reflect a true America, do not represent who we are. What we’re seeing are a small number of extremists dedicated to lawlessness. This is not the dissent. It’s disorder. It’s chaos. It borders on sedition, and it must end now. I call this mob to pull back and allow the work of democracy to go forward. You’ve heard me say before in different contexts, the words of a President matter, no matter how good or bad that President is. At their best, the words of a President can inspire. At their worst, they can insight.
Therefore, I call on President Trump to go on national television now, to fulfill his oath and defend the constitution and demand an end to this siege. They storm the Capitol, to smash windows, to occupy offices, the floor of the United States Senate, rummaging through desks on the Capitol, on the House of Representatives, threatening the safety of duly-elected officials. It’s not protest. It’s insurrection. The world’s watching. Like so many other Americans, I am genuinely shocked and saddened that our nation, so long, the beacon of light and hope for democracy has come to such a dark moment. Through war and strife, America’s endured much and we will endure here and we will prevail again, and we’ll prevail now. The work of the moment and the work of the next four years must be the restoration of democracy, of decency, honor, respect the Rule of Law, just plain, simple decency, the renewal of a politics.
It’s about solving problems, looking out for one another, not stoking the flames of hate and chaos. As I said, America is about honor, decency, respect, tolerance. That’s who we are. That’s who we’ve always been. The certification of the Electoral College vote, it’s supposed to be a sacred ritual, which we affirm, it’s purpose is to affirm the majesty of American democracy. But today’s reminder, a painful one, that democracy is fragile and to preserve it, requires people of goodwill, leaders who have the courage to stand up, who are devoted, not to the pursuit of power or their personal interests, pursuits of their own selfish interest at any cost, but at the common good. Think what, our children watching television is thinking. Think what the rest of the world is looking at. For nearly two and a half centuries, we, the people, in search of a more perfect union, have kept our eyes on that common good. America is so much better than what we’ve seen today.
Watching the scenes from the Capitol, I was reminded as I prepared other speeches in the past, I was reminded of the words of Abraham Lincoln in his Annual Message to Congress, whose work has today been interrupted by chaos. Here’s what Lincoln said. He said, “He shall nobly save or merely lose the last best hope on Earth.” He went on to say, The way is plain, peaceful, generous, just. A way, which if followed, the world will forever applaud and God must forever bless.” The way is playing here too. That should we are. It’s the way of democracy, of respect, of decency, of honor and commitment as patriots to this nation. Not withstanding what I saw today, we’re seeing today, I remain optimistic about the incredible opportunities. There’s never been anything we can’t do, when we do it together. This God-awful display today, is bringing it home to every Republican and Democrat and Independent in the nation, that we must step up.
This is the United States of America. There’s never, ever, ever, ever, ever been a thing we’ve tried to do, that we’ve done it together, we’ve not been able to do it. So, President Trump, step up. May God bless America and may God protect our troops and all those folks at the Capitol who are trying to preserve order. Thank you, and I’m sorry to have kept you waiting.
It’s good to be back. It’s good to be back. Let’s hear it for Allie, and that introduction, and a great line up of entertainers you’ve had. You’re probably disappointed, you’re not speaking. We’ll get the entertainers back out here.
And let’s hear it for Stacey Abrams.
Nobody, nobody in America has done more for the right to vote than Stacey. Stacey, you’re a change in Georgia. You’ve changed America. And I want to personally thank you again. So let’s hear it for the next Public Service Commissioner, Daniel Blackman. I don’t know where Daniel is, but I know he’s here. Look, and one of the best Mayors America has, and my good friend, Keisha Lance Bottoms. If I had three of her, I could rule the world.
I love her, I tell you. And let’s hear it for the next United States Senators Jon Ossoff and the Reverend Warnock. I was just talking with them in the back. They’re talented. They’re principled. They’re qualified. They’re decent. They’re honorable. They mean what they say and they believe what I believe the definition of America is. It’s about possibilities, unlike any other nation in the world, anything’s possible.
They’re bending the arc of history towards justice and hope and progress. And that’s not hyperbole, that’s real. Folks, this is it. This is it. It’s a New Year. And tomorrow can be a new day for Atlanta, for Georgia, and for America.
First, let me start by saying thank you for electing me and Kamala as President and Vice President of the United States. You voted in record numbers in November. Your voices were heard. Your votes were counted. And the rule of the people prevailed. We won, three times here. Each recount, you know what I mean? I think we should count it as three states. We won three times. And now, we need for you to vote again in record numbers, to make your voices heard again and again, to change Georgia, to change America again. And this is not an exaggeration. Georgia, the whole nation is looking to you to lead us forward, for real. You know it. You cannot turn on any national television show without knowing about what’s going on here and what you all are doing. The power, the power is literally in your hands. Unlike any time in my career, one state can chart the course, not just for the next four years, but for the next generation.
 By electing Jon and the Reverend, you can make an immediate difference in your own lives, the lives of the people all across this country. Because their election will put an end to the block in Washington, that $2000 stimulus check, that money would go out the door immediately, to help people who are in real trouble. Think about what it will mean to your lives, putting food on the table, paying rent
Lives, putting food on the table, paying rent, paying part of your mortgage, paying down the credit card, paying the phone bill, the gas bill, the electric bill. Just look around. Millions of people in this country out of work through no fault of their own. No fault of their own. They’re struggling. Many are fearful and many have given up hope. Look at the lines at food banks, hours and hours and hours. This is the United States of America, for God’s sake and there are food lines like we’ve not seen since the depression and they’re getting longer. Families, children, people who have worked their whole lives and never asked for a thing except a fighting chance, now, they’re lining up for food in America and the debate over $2,000 isn’t some abstract debate in Washington, it’s about real lives. Your lives, the lives of good, hardworking Americans and if you’re like millions of Americans all across this country, you need the money, you need the help and you need it now.
Look, Georgia there’s no one in America with more power to make that happen than you, the citizens of Atlanta, the citizens of Georgia and that’s not an exaggeration. That’s literally true. If you send Jon and the reverend to Washington, those $2,000 checks will go out the door restoring hope and decency and honor for so many people who are struggling right now, and if you send Senators Perdue and Loeffler back to Washington, those checks will never get there. It’s just that simple. The power is literally in your hands by electing Jon and the reverend you can break the gridlock that has gripped Washington and this nation.
With their votes in the senate, we’ll be able to make the progress we need to make on jobs, on healthcare, on justice, on the environment and so many important things. By electing Jon and the reverend, you’ll be voting to get the states the resources they need to get the vaccines distributed. It’s a shame what’s happening now. It’s a literal shame. I’ve said it before, getting America vaccinated will be one of the most difficult operational challenges this nation’s ever faced but we’ve known it for the last months.
This administration has gotten off to a God-awful start. The president spends more time whining and complaining than doing something about the problem. I don’t know why he still wants the job, he doesn’t want to do the work. Look, the states need help. There’s a reason why the constitution said the federal government could have a deficit spending in times of crisis and states have to balance their budgets. It’s for this very thing. It’s the whole idea, your states have to balance your budgets. So what’s happening? You’re going to see more and more people laid off, more firefighters, police officers, school teachers, first responders, the people we need badly now. The states need more money to do the job. They need to the federal government to work with them, not attack them and leave them out there hanging.
It’s going to be tough to get this done, but we have to do it. People’s lives literally depend on it. Our economy depends on it and we’ll get it done by electing Jon and the reverend to be voting to get their states and local government funding the money they need to keep cops, firefighters, teachers, local responders, keep them on the job protecting you, looking out for your children.
Look, states have been struggling through this pandemic. They need help, by electing Jon and the reverend you’ll be sending a powerful message to congress and to the country. It is time for this nation, for god’s sake to finally come together, finally to work together, to unite, to put the anger and the division and the divisive politics to the past, behind us and here’s one more thing, voting for Jon and the reverend won’t just be good for America, it’ll be good for Georgia and here’s why.
When you vote for Jon and Raphael, you’ll be sending two senators who will fight for you, who will put Georgia first, who’ll put you first. You don’t have that now. You have two senators that thinks it’s more important to reward wealth than hard work in a tax system. You have two senators now who think they don’t work for you, they work for Trump. I mean it, think about it. You have two senators, who think their loyalty is to Trump, not to Georgia. You have two senators who think they’ve sworn an oath to Donald Trump, not to the Unites States Constitution but let me tell you something.
I got elected when I was 29 years old and six more times the United States Senator from Delaware and guess what, not once did I think I took an oath to any president, democrat or republican. I took an oath to the United States Constitution and as president, I don’t believe the United States senators are going to work for me, they work for the people of Georgia. That’s why I’m not asking your senators to be loyal to me, I believe they should be loyal to you, to Georgia, the United States Constitution, period and if you vote for Jon and the reverend, that’s what you’re going to get, decent, honorable men.
They won’t put a president or party first and they sure won’t put themselves first. They know public service is about you. It isn’t about them. It’s not about enriching themselves. It’s about making people’s lives better, about giving people a chance, just an even shot, no guarantee but an even shot. It’s time to start rewarding work and not wealth and if you listen to Jon and the reverend, that’s what they’ve been saying, that’s what they’ve been campaigning on.
Look, I’m dealing with COVID. I’m revitalizing our economy, our healthcare, our voting rights, criminal justice, racial justice, climate change and the things that matter and will make a difference in your lives and the lives of your families. Georgia, as dark as these days of winter seem, I’m still more optimistic about this country than any time in my entire life. I really mean it. The American people now understand clearly what’s at stake and Jon and Raphael share that optimism. They saw firsthand the power of believing in the promise of America in our darkest months. Jon learned it from my old friend and yours, John Lewis.
Reverend Warnock sees the power of faith overcome the toughest trials that life can throw at us. He believes as I do, in the quote of the German philosopher, Kierkegaard who said, “Faith sees best in the dark.” I know they share with me that deep faith in the American people in this country, a faith that enables us to overcome adversity, to lift each other up, to be a beacon of light for one another and for the world. That’s who we are and that we should never give up on.
Look folks, I’ve said many times and I’ll say it here again, there’s nothing and I say this again, nothing, nothing, nothing this country isn’t able to do when we decide to do it together. We have faced tougher times before and we’ve always overcome. We’ve always overcome. We’ve always come out better than we went in, no matter what. I know this campaign has been exhausting. You put the hard work in over the last few years to get to this moment. It’s been intense. It’s been non-stop but I’m asking you to give everything you’ve got one more day, one more day and that one more day, this not hyperbole, you can change America.
So if you haven’t voted, vote. If you’ve already voted, then I’m asking you one more day of making calls, and safely knocking on doors. Go to iwillvote. com/GA to find your polling location. Just like you did in November, vote, vote, vote. Vote for Jon and the reverend. Vote. In America, as our opposition friends are finding out, all power flows from the people, from the people.
That’s our history. That’s our law. That’s our tradition. That’s our constitution. That’s our democracy. Politicians cannot assert, take or seize power. Power if given, granted by the American people alone and we can never give that up. It’s always, always the will of the people must prevail. So today, tomorrow vote. Make sure your voice is heard. Do it for yourselves, do it for your families, do it for your children, do it for your state, your country. Do it for all those who’ve given up so much. Think of all those who’ve given up so much to secure that right. Do it for the country you love, because I know you love this country and the future you want to build for everyone in this country.
Do it for all those around the world who aspire like us to be free and a democratic people who look to us. I’ve been in almost a hundred countries, they all look to America. The power, the power is in your hands. Jon, and Reverend Warnock, we’re counting on you, so is Kamala, so am I and so is America. We’re a nation built on honor, decency, dignity and respect. America is and must continue to be a beacon of light, liberty and democracy and unity. That’s who we are. That’s the United States of America. Vote. Vote. Vote. Vote. God bless you all and may God protect our troops. Thank you, thank you, thank you. Thank you.
Federal, state and local law enforcement are working around the clock to gain more information on motive and intent. This bombing was a reminder of the destructive power that an individual or a small group can muster and the need for continuing vigilance across the board.
I want to thank the police department in Nashville, particularly those five police officers who worked so quickly to evacuate the area before the explosion occurred, risking their own lives. And for all the firefighters and first responders who jumped into action early on that Christmas morning, last Christmas morning. Their bravery and cool headedness likely saved lives and prevented a worse outcome, and we are internally grateful to that law enforcement agency. And I know the hearts of all Americans are with the people of Nashville as they rebuild and recover from this traumatic event.
Now Vice President Harris and I, along with our nominees that lead the national security institutions have just been briefed by some of the professionals who have been conducting agency reviews as a part of our transition. This a long standing part of the orderly transition of power in American democracy. We welcome teams from the incoming Trump Pence Administration four years ago, gave them access to all that we had. And over the past few weeks, teams of genuine policy and management experts, many of them previous government experience who have gone into agencies across the government to conduct interviews with personnel, to gather information and to assess the state of the federal government, excuse me, that we will shortly inherit.
These teams worked under incredibly difficult circumstances, taking COVID-19 precautions and waiting weeks for the ascertainment, meaning that so they could go in and be cleared to go in, but they have done an outstanding job. For some agencies, our teams received exemplary cooperation from the career staff in those agencies. From others, most notably the Department of Defense, we encountered obstruction from the political leadership of that department. And the truth is, many of the agencies that are critical to our security have incurred enormous damage. Many of them have been hollowed out in personnel, capacity and in morale. In the policy processes that have atrophied or have been sidelined, in the despair of our alliances and the disrepair of those alliances, and our absence from key institutions that matter to the welfare of the American people. And the general disengagement from the world and all of it makes it harder for our government to protect the American people, to defend our vital interests in a world where threats are constantly evolving and our adversaries are constantly adapting.
Rebuilding the full set of our instruments of foreign policy and national security is a key challenge that the Vice President elect Harris and I will face upon taking office, starting with our diplomacy. Today, we heard from the leaders of the state and USA ID agency review teams about the critical early investment we’re going to need to make in our diplomacy and our development efforts and in rebuilding our alliances to close the ranks with our partners and bring to bear the full benefits of our shared strength for the American people.
When we consider the most daunting threats of our time, we know that meeting them requires American engagement and American leadership, but also that none of them can be solved by America acting alone. Take climate change, for example. The United States accounts for less than 15% of the global carbon emissions, but without clear, coordinated and committed approach from the other 85% of the carbon emitters, the world will continue to warm. Storms will continue to worsen. Climate change will continue to threaten the lives and livelihoods, and public health and economics of our existence and our, literally, the very existence of our planet.
We’ve learned so painfully this year the cost of being unprepared for a pandemic that leaps borders and circles the globe. If we aren’t investing with our partners around the world to strengthen the health systems everywhere, we’re undermining our ability to permanently defeat COVID-19 and we’re leaving ourselves vulnerable to the next deadly epidemic. And as we compete with China to hold China’s government accountable for its trade abuses, technology, human rights, and other fronts, our position would much stronger when we build coalitions of like-minded partners and allies that make common cause with us in defense of our shared interest and our shared values.
We make up only 25%, almost 25%, of the entire economy of the world, but together with our democratic partners, we more than double our economic leverage. On any issue that matters to the US and China relationship from pursuing a foreign policy for the middle class including a trade and economic agenda that produces and protects American workers, our intellectual prosperity and the environment to ensure security and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific region. To championing human rights, we’re stronger and more effective when we’re flanked by nations that share our vision and the future of our world.
That’s how we multiply the impact of our efforts to make those efforts more sustainable. That’s the power of smart, effective American leadership. But right now there’s an enormous vacuum. We’re going to have to regain the trust and confidence of a world that has begun to find ways to work around us or work without us.
We also heard from key leaders of our intelligence and defense review teams, including Stephanie O’Sullivan, former Principal Deputy Director of the National Intelligence and retired Army Lieutenant General, Karen Gibson. We talked about the different strategic challenges we’re going to face from both Russia and China and the reforms we must make to put ourselves in the strongest possible position to meet those challenges. That includes modernizing our defense priorities to better deter aggression in the future, rather than continuing to overinvest in legacy systems designed to address threats of the past.
We have to be able to innovate, to reimagine our defenses against growing threats in new realms like cyberspace. We’re still learning about the extent of the SolarWinds Hack and the vulnerabilities that have been exposed. As I said last week, this attack constitutes a grave risk to our national security. We need to close the gap between where our capabilities are now and where they need to be to better deter, detect, disrupt, and respond to those sorts of intrusions in the future. This is an area Republicans and Democrats are in agreement, and we should be able to work on a bipartisan basis to better secure the American people against malign cyber actors.
And right now, as our nation is in a period of transition, we need to make sure that nothing is lost in the handoff between administrations. My team needs a clear picture of our force posture around the world and our operations to deter our enemies. We need full visibility into the budget planning underway at the Defense Department and other agencies in order to avoid any window of confusion or catch up that our adversaries may try to exploit.
But as I said from the beginning, we have encountered roadblocks from the political leadership at the Department of Defense and the Office of Management and Budget. Right now, we just aren’t getting all the information that we need from the outgoing administration in key national security areas. It’s nothing short, in my view, of irresponsibility.
Finally, we spoke about the day one challenge that we’re going to need to address immediately, drawing on the skillset of the Department of Homeland Security and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. We were briefed on the steps needed to clean up the humanitarian disaster that the Trump Administration has systematically created on our southern border. We will institute humane and orderly responses. That means rebuilding the capacity we need to safely and quickly process asylum seekers without creating near term crisis in the midst of this deadly pandemic.
These are hard issues and the current administration has made them much harder by working to erode our capacity. It’s going to take time to rebuild that capacity. We’re going to work purposely, diligently and responsibly to roll back Trump’s restrictions starting on day one, but it is not as simple as throwing a switch to turn everything back on, especially amid a pandemic. We’ll have to have a process to ensure everyone’s health and safety, including the safety of asylum seekers hoping for a new start in the United States, free of violence and persecution. Of course, an essential part of this will be managing the safe, equitable, and efficient distribution of vaccinations to as many Americans as possible as quickly as possible. FEMA has an enormous part to play in this. And we heard from the former FEMA director, Craig Fugate, today. Want to make sure that our administration is poised to make full use of FEMA’s domestic reach and capacity in managing our COVID response.
And finally, from every briefer, I was heartened, I was literally heartened to hear about the incredible strength we’ll be inheriting in the career professionals and working people across these agencies. They never stopped doing their jobs and continue to serve our country day in and day out to keep their fellow Americans safe just as they’ve always done. These agencies are filled with patriots who’ve earned our respect, and who should never be treated as political footballs. I’m looking forward to the honor of working with them again, to asking further advice and inputs, to help shape the best possible policies for all Americans. I want to thank the incredible folks who’ve served on these agency review teams as part of this transition. They’ve dedicated their time and energy, their vital experience and expertise to help ensure Vice President Harris and I are ready to hit the ground running. And we look forward the start of a new year, fresh with hope and possibilities for better days to come, but clear-eyed about the challenges that will not disappear overnight.
I want to reiterate my message to the American people. We’ve overcome incredible challenge as a nation, and we’ve done it before and we will do it again. We’ll do it by coming together, by uniting after years of pain and loss, a year particularly needed to heal, to rebuild, to reclaim America’s place in the world. This is the work that lies ahead of us and I know we’re up to the task. We will champion liberty and democracy once more. We will reclaim our credibility to lead the free world. And we will once again lead, not just by the example of our power, but by the power of our example. God bless you all and may God protect our troops. Thank you.
Our economy is poised to come back and come alive and I can see a return to normalcy in the next year. I also see incredible opportunities for our nation in the years ahead in job creation, clean energy, racial equality, and much more. But we need to be honest. The next few weeks and months are going to be very tough, a very tough period for our nation, maybe the toughest during this entire pandemic. I know it’s hard to hear but it’s the truth. As Roosevelt said, “I think the American people can take whatever we tell them if we tell them straight from the shoulder.” We need to steel our spines for what’s ahead. We need to follow even more closely the recommendations to slow the spread of the virus. And each of us needs to do what we can to protect ourselves, our families and our fellow Americans. We’re going to get through this. Brighter days are coming but it’s going to take all the grit and determination we have as Americans to get it done.
So today I want to be clear about five things every American should know about our efforts to contain COVID-19 and where the vaccine stands today. First, things are going to get worse before they get better. In September, we passed a grim milestone, 200,000 deaths. At that time, in this very room many of you remember I warned that we hit 400,000 deaths before the end of the Trump administration in January. Critics said I was being too alarmist and negative but as I’ve said all along I will tell you like it is when it comes to COVID and the reality is it looks like that we’re going to hit that grim milestone. We’ve just crossed 330,000 deaths in America. We’re averaging daily death rates of nearly 2,200 people which means we’ll lose tens of thousands of more lives in the months to come.
Hospitals are being stretched beyond capacity and that’s data before we see the impact of the cases coming from the recent holidays and this upcoming holiday of New Year’s Eve. People getting infected today don’t show up in cases for weeks and those who perish with the disease die weeks after initial exposure. So we have to anticipate that the infections over the holidays will produce soaring cases counts in January and soaring death tolls into February. Turning this around is going to take time. We might not see improvement until we’re well into March as we’ll take time for our COVID response plan to begin to produce visible progress.
The second thing to know is the Trump administration’s plan to distribute vaccines is falling behind, far behind. Were grateful to the companies, the doctors, the scientists, the researchers, the clinical trial participants and Operation Warp Speed for developing the vaccines quickly. But as I long feared and warned the effort to distribute and administer the vaccine is not progressing as it should. A few weeks ago, the Trump administration suggested the 20 million Americans could be vaccinated by the end of December. With only a few days left in December we’ve only vaccinated a few million so far. And the pace of the vaccination program as moving now, if it continues to move as it is now, it’s going to take years, not months to vaccinate the American people.
Which brings me to the third thing every American should know, the Biden Harris administration will spare no effort to make sure people get vaccinated. I’ve laid out three challenges in our first 100 days. One of them is ensuring that 100 million shots have been administered by the end of the first 100 days. If Congress provides the funding we’d be able to meet this incredible goal. It would take ramping up five to six times the current pace to one million shots a day. But even with that improvement, even if we boost the speed of vaccinations to one million shots a day, it will still take months to have the majority of the United States population vaccinated.
I’ve directed my team to prepare a much more aggressive effort with more federal involvement and leadership to get things back on track. We’ll find ways to boost the pace of the vaccinations but as Dr. Fauci and others have stated these past few days this will take more time than anyone would like and more time than the promises from the Trump administration have suggested. This is going to be the greatest operational challenge we’ve ever faced as a nation but we’re going to get it done but it’s going to take a vast new effort that’s not yet underway.
And that gets me to the fourth thing that we should know, I’m going to move heaven and earth to get us going in the right direction. I’m going to use my power under the Defense Production Act when I’m sworn in and order private industry to accelerate the making of the materials needed for the vaccines as well as protective gear. Vice-president Harris and I had been speaking with county officials, mayors, governors of both parties to speed up the distribution of the vaccines across the nation. We’re planning a whole government effort and we’re going to work to set up vaccination sites and send mobile units to hard to reach communities.
And we also know there’s a vaccination hesitancy in many communities, especially black, Latino, Native American communities, who have not always been treated with the dignity and honesty they deserve by the federal government and the scientific community throughout our history. That’s why we will launch a massive public education campaign to increase vaccine acceptance. We’ll do everything we can to show the vaccines are safe and critically important for one’s own health and that of their families and the communities. That means we’re also going to make sure vaccines are distributed equitably so every person who wants a vaccine can get it no matter the color of their skin or where they live. And we’re going to ensure vaccinations are free of charge.
Fifth, while the pandemic rages on and as we increase the supply, distribution and administration of the vaccine we have to remain vigilant. As part of the 100 day challenge I’m going to be asking the American people to wear a mask for the first 100 days of my administration. It’s not a political statement, it’s a patriotic duty. Our administration are going to require a mask wearing where I have the power to do so for federal workers, in federal facilities and interstate travel like planes and trains. And we’ve been working directly with county officials, mayors, governors, to implement mask mandates in their cities and their towns and their states. Masking has been a divisive issue in this country but COVID is a killer in red states and blue states alike. So I encourage you all to wear a mask, encourage your family and friends to do the same. It’s one of the easiest things we can do that will make a huge difference to save lives.
Another 100 day challenge is opening most of our K through eight schools by the end of the first 100 days in the spring. Look, we can only do that if Congress provides the necessary funding so we get schools, districts, communities, and states the resources they need for those so many things that aren’t there already in a tight budget. They need funding for testing to help reopen schools, more funding for transportation so students can maintain social distances on buses. They need it for school buildings, for additional cleaning service, protective equipment, ventilation systems. This is going to require an additional tens of billions of dollars to get this done.
And Congress also needs to fund and provide more protective equipment for frontline health workers who are still reusing masks and gowns. We need to scale up testing so anyone who needs one can get a test. After 10 months of the pandemic we still don’t have enough testing, it’s a travesty. All this vaccination, testing, protective gear is going to require more funding from Congress, more than was just approved. That’s why I’ll propose a COVID action package early next year and challenge Congress to act on it quickly.
Look, my ability to change the direction of this pandemic starts in three weeks. With thousands dying every day between now and then let me conclude by discussing what needs to happen now. I congratulate the bipartisan majority on passing and the president on signing the COVID relief bill. It’s still, even though it’s a step, an important step, still a move in the right direction and it will help people in need. And it’ll pay for some but not all of what we need to fix the COVID response. It’s a down payment but now with that done I hope the president will also clearly unambiguously promote masks wearing. I give former governor Chris Christie credit. He and I have disagreed in a number of things but I’m thankful he’s now encouraging people to do the right thing and wear a mask for themselves, their loved ones and their country. I hope that President Trump will listen to him. He can do it too. It would make a huge difference for President Trump to say wear masks.
I hope the president will clearly and unambiguously urge all Americans to take the vaccine once it’s available. I took it to instill public confidence in the vaccine. President elect Harris took hers today for the same reason. And when the president’s doctor’s recommend it President Trump should take it and it’s still the same degree of confidence.
Let me also say this to the American people, we can save all the experts tell us between 60 and 100,000 lives in the weeks and months ahead if we just step up together, wear a mask, socially distance, wash our hands, avoid large indoor gatherings. I know all of these are not easy to ask but I’m asking you to make a sacrifice. You’re already making tremendous sacrifices every single day. It’s hard on your lives, on your livelihoods, on your kids, on your families. It’s not small what we’re asking of you but we’re in this together and the actions we take now are going to help us contain the pandemic and get us back to our lives and to our loved ones.
So the American people to all of you I know there’s a lot we have to do but I want you to know there’s also much we can do. We’re the United States of America. We’ve been through hard times before as a nation and we’ll come through this as well. I promise you we will. So please, I wish you a happy new year. May God bless you and may God protect our troops. Wear a mask.
Good afternoon, everyone. Before I take questions, I’d like to wish everyone a Merry Christmas and happy holidays. This has been one of the toughest years we’ve ever faced as a nation, and the pandemic, the economic crisis, calls for racial justice, historic and punishing wildfires and storms. So this season of reflection carries a much deeper meaning than it usually does. Over 320,000 lives lost to this virus. And Jill and I send our prayers as I’m sure all of you do to all who are facing this dark winter with an empty seat at the dinner table, where a loved one used to sit and talk and laugh and reminisce. Our hearts go out to all of you who have fallen on hard times, through no fault of your own, I might add. Unable to sleep at night, weighed down with the worry of what tomorrow will bring for you and for your family.
We’re especially grateful for the healthcare workers on the front lines, the scientists, the researchers, the clinical trial participants on the front lines of the vaccine who deserve our thanks and who delivered a scientific breakthrough. And for all of you who have deployed family, deployed family members in the military. We know what it’s like. We know what that experience is like, how difficult it can be, especially at this time of the year. Our family knows your sacrifice and our hearts are always with you. But keep the faith.
Throughout this year, we had to forgo many of our favorite holiday traditions we have as families, as communities, and as a country. For the Bidens, we usually have 20 to 25 family members over for Christmas dinner. And then the immediate family, 14 of our kids and grandkids and their spouses for coming down the stairs on Christmas morning. But not this year. Like we did over Thanksgiving, we all have to care enough for each other that we have to stay apart just a little bit longer. I know it’s hard. We have a long way to go, but we’re grateful that we’ve got the vaccine. And yesterday in an effort to instill some confidence in the vaccine, I had my shot administered in public. And I got a chance to thank all those nurses and docs at Christiana Hospital for what they’ve been putting up with and doing for so long.
I look forward to the second shot and I have absolute confidence in the vaccine. But we’re in short supply. Taking the vaccine from a vial into the arm of millions of Americans is one of the biggest operational challenges the United States has ever faced. We’re 300 million people, and we’re going to take many more months for that to happen. In the meantime, this pandemic rages on. Experts say things are going to get worse before they get better, not withstanding the fact we have the vaccine. As you all know, we’re averaging a death rate of close to 3000 people a day. That means we’re going to lose tens of thousands of more lives in the months to come. And the vaccine won’t be able to stop that.
So we’ll still have to remain vigilant. We need everyone to mask up, stay socially distanced, avoid large gatherings, particularly inside. We need to work in a bipartisan way. That’s the only way we’re going to get through this, in tough times. We have our first hint and glimpse of bipartisanship. I applaud the Congress their economic relief package that included funding for vaccine distribution, much needed temporary relief for workers, families, and small businesses.
In this election, the American people made it clear they want us to reach across the aisle and work together on matters of national concern to get something done. And I believed that to be the case from the very beginning of my campaign. And I’m happy to see members of Congress heeding that message as well from their own constituents. Leaders in both House and Senate, both parties, deserve credit for making the hard compromises to get this done. But like all compromises it’s far from perfect, but it does provide vital relief at a critical moment.
However, as I’ve said all along, this bill is just the first step, a down payment, in addressing the crisis, the crises, more than one, that we’re in. There are a lot more work to do. Early next year, I’m going to put forward to the Congress my plans for what comes next. We’ll need more help to fully distribute the vaccine. We’re going to need more testing in order to be able to open our schools. We need more funding to help firefighters and police, many of whom are being laid off as I speak. And the same with nurses, risking their lives in the front lines. The same for millions of hurting families who are unable to put food on the table, pay rent, or the mortgage. Unemployment’s extended for another 10 weeks. It’s going to take a lot longer than that. But Congress did its job this week, and I can and I must ask them to do it again next year. But even with the changes in approach I’m going to put in place in late January, people are still going to be getting sick and dying from COVID. One thing I promise you about my leadership during this crisis, I’m going to tell it to you straight. I’m going to tell you the truth. And here’s the simple truth.
Our darkest days in the battle against COVID are ahead of us, not behind us. So we need to prepare ourselves, to steel our spines. As frustrating as it is to hear, it’s going to take patience, persistence, and determination to beat this virus. There will be no time to waste in taking the steps we need to turn this crisis around. My administration will start to do it’s part on our first day in office, with masking requirements, a new strategy for testing, accelerated protection, protective gear. And we’re going to challenge Congress and the American people to step up immediately as well to do their part. Passing the relief bill passed by Congress is another challenge which my administration will confront, on a bipartisan basis.
A massive cyber security breach against the US companies, many of them, as well as federal agencies. And there’s still so much we don’t know, including the full scope of the breach or the extent of the damage it has caused. But we know this much, this attack constitutes a grave risk to our national security. It was carefully planned and carefully orchestrated. It was carried out by using sophisticated cyber tools. The attackers succeeded in catching the federal government off guard and unprepared. Foreign actors have been working on this breach since late last year, at least last year, setting the landscape to compromise our systems, scraping up sensitive information from our world-class tech sector and from private businesses and from United States government agencies.
The truth is this, the Trump Administration failed to prioritize cyber security. It did that from eliminating or downgrading cyber coordinators in both the White House and at the State Department, to firing the Director of Cyberspace and Infrastructure Security Agency, to President Trump’s irrational downplaying of the seriousness of this attack. Enough’s enough. In an age when so much of our lives are conducted online, cyber attacks must be treated as a serious threat by our leadership at the highest levels. We can’t let this go unanswered. That means making clear and publicly who was responsible for the attack and taking meaningful steps to hold them in account. Initial indications, including from Secretary Pompeo, Secretary of State, and Attorney General William Barr, suggest that Russia, Russia is responsible for this…
Russia. Russia is responsible for this breach. It certainly fits Russia’s long history of reckless, disruptive cyber activities, but the Trump administration needs to make an official attribution. This assault happened on Donald Trump’s watch, when he wasn’t watching. It’s still has responsibility as President to defend American interests for the next four weeks. But rest assured, that even if he does not take it seriously, I will. While I’m disappointed by the response of President Trump. I was pleased to see leaders in both parties in the Congress, speak out loudly and clearly on this attack. Again, I want to thank prominent Republicans in the Senate, particularly, for speaking out. It’s a sign, a sign that with a new administration, we can confront these threats on a bipartisan basis with a united front here at home.
That should be encouraging to the American people and a warning to our adversaries. In the meantime, the President’s team for the next four weeks need to cooperate fully, which they haven’t been doing, to share information as it becomes available on both the impact and our response, to ensure a smooth transition to protect the American people as administrations change. Over the next month, I intend to continue focusing on building my team, so that the right people are in place on day one of my administration, to take over this effort, to prioritize cyber security across the board. I’ll consult with experts to plan for the steps that my administration will take in order to secure our systems, improve our cyber defenses and to better withstand future attacks that we know will come and to impose costs on those who conduct them.
I fully expect bipartisan support from this, based on what we’ve heard so far. Our adversaries are highly capable. Cyber threats are among the greatest threats to our global security in the 21st century. I believe we have to treat them with the same seriousness of purpose that we treated threats of other unconventional weapons. We have to work with our allies to establish clear international rules and mechanisms to enforce them, and consequences for those countries that violate them. I want to close with this. As I look at the first of what will be millions of vaccinations going in the arms of Americans after 100s, 1000s of lives lost, Congress, finally passing an economic relief package after months and months of delay, at a new urgency for bipartisan approach to cybersecurity, after years of a President who refused to stand up to our adversaries and hold them accountable, I’m reminded of a quote, this season from a Jesuit Priest named Alfred Delp.
He wrote, “Advent is a time for rousing.” Delp believed, at first, we are shaken to our depths, and then we’re ready for a season of hope. As a nation, we’ve certainly been shaken to our depths this year. Now it’s time to wake, to get moving, a time for hope. We’ve gotten through tough times before in this nation. We’ll get through these difficult times as well. We’ll do it by coming together, by working with one another, by being … You’ve heard me say many times what we are at our best, the United States of America. There are certain things that rise way above partisan differences, that threaten the United States. There are national security interests. I require us to cooperate and I’m confident, I’m confident we’ll be able to do that.
After a year of pain and loss, it’s time to unite, to heal, to rebuild. For all those who are suffering right now, that enormous loss and lie awake at night wondering what tomorrows bring, I’d say, “Well, God bless you all, and I promise you, we’re going to continue to push as hard as we can to finish the job.” May God bless you all. May God protect our troops. Merry Christmas and happy holidays to you all. Now I’d be happy to take some questions. Megan, I’ll let you tell me who’s-
The answer is, first of all, it is a grave risk and it continues. I see no evidence that it’s under control. I’ve seen none, heard of none. The Defense Department won’t even brief us on many things. I know of nothing that suggests it’s under control. This President has even identified who’s responsible yet. Number two, the question of the damage done, remains to be determined. We have to look at it very closely, the nature of the breaches, how extensive they are and what damage has been done. Thirdly, there’s going to be a necessity, as President Obama and I, and our administration talked about, we need international society, international rules of the road on cyber security. We have to bring along our allies and our friends, so we hold everyone accountable who breaches any of these basic fundamental rules. Lastly, I believe that when I learned the extent of the damage and in fact who is formally responsible, they can be assured that we will respond and probably respond in kind. There’s many options, which I will not discuss now.We have not done that in any other areas where we have faced international crises. We don’t sit here and say that we’re going to strike you with a nuclear weapon. We don’t sit, and we’re going to say, and so on. Let us determine what the extent of the damage is, and I promise you, they’re be a response.No, not based on the Attorney General. It’s just a matter of getting to it and through it and being able to announce them all. They’ll all be announced either just before or just after. We’re going to make an announcement tomorrow. We may have another announcement between then and Christmas, and New Year’s. We’re just working through all of the efforts to do due diligence.No. I guarantee you I’m going to do what I said. The Attorney General of the United States of America is not the President’s lawyer. I will appoint someone who I expect to enforce the law as the law is written, not guided by me.
As you know, there already is one, unrelated to finding that new strain, number one. The question is, whether or not, at the very least, it only allows Americans coming home to be able to come-
It only allows Americans coming home to be able to come back to the states, citizens. One of the things I’m waiting to get a response from my COVID team is whether or not we should require testing before they get on an aircraft to fly home, number one. Number two, when they get home, should they quarantine? That’s my instinct, but I’m waiting to hear from my experts right now.
You all asked the most interesting questions. Have you ever known anyone in the history of the United States of America that could be president and assure exactly what the Congress is going to do? I can’t assure anything, but I can tell you what I expect. I fully expect on those critical issues that we’re facing, number one, being able to get all the work we need done and all the funding to be able to get that vaccine in everyone’s arm, and that’s 300 million people. We’ll get that done because you’re going to see that the responsibility has already been recognized by the Republicans and Democrats in the Congress, because the constituency is going to demand it. Number one.Number two, all those people are out there hurting, have lost jobs through no fault of their own, they’ve extended unemployment for 10 weeks. Simply not sufficient. Necessary to get it done to get through the holidays, but I predict you we’ll get cooperation and get that done. I’ve been arguing from the very beginning and told how … I love it. It makes me sound so much younger, how naive I am about how the Congress works. I think I’ve been proven right across the board. The things that are left to deal with from unemployment to people needing unemployment insurance to the ability to have access to healthcare, the ability to get this treatment for free, et cetera, all of that is something that the public is not going to stand for us not doing. And I think with Donald Trump not in the way, that will also enhance the prospect of things getting done.Well look, that’s a negotiated issue, but it will. Yes, it will. And I think, by the way, I think we owe Bernie Sanders and his Republican colleagues the thanks for getting not all the stimulus we looked for, 1200, but getting 600 done. I think you’re seeing that there is a clear understanding that these issues go beyond any ideology. People are desperately hurting and the Republicans are hurting as badly as Democrats. There are a few people, and I’m not saying they’re responsible for any of this, but a few people are doing extremely well in that K shaped recovery. And they’re doing fine. But they still need access to the vaccines. They still need access to making sure that we are able to handle crises in the hospitals, et cetera. So I think on the things relating to A, vaccine distribution, which is going to cost billions more dollars, is simply going to cost billions more dollars. We need national standards, the layout to help governors to start how they’re going to get that vaccine throughout their communities, number one.Number two, we’re going to need to take care of those people who through no fault of their own are unemployed. They’ve worked like hell, but they have no job because of the COVID crisis. And thirdly, we’re going to have to begin to rebuild the country. We can’t wait. We can’t wait to rebuild the economy. And we’re going to have to start doing that now on infrastructure programs and a whole range of other things. I think sort of the dawn is broken on the vast majority of people. There are still people who don’t want to help. There’s still people who are insisting my way or the highway. But the vast majority of the members of the Congress, I believe, will be able to work out those specific issues that are of national consequence.
My ask will be laid out there in detail, but it relates to four things. Number one, making sure we have all the money we need to get the vaccine to 300 million Americans at a minimum over the next year, the next calendar year. Number one. Number two, making sure that all those people who are unemployed through no fault of their own because of the COVID crisis, small businesses and big businesses, et cetera, shutting down, that they continue to be able to live day to day. They don’t engage in food shortages. They’re not in a position where they get thrown out of their homes. I would also be asking for a moratorium on being evicted from your homes for failure to pay rent, moratoriums on relating to the issue of whether or not your mortgage would be paid.
Thirdly, I think it’s critically important. We provide all of the PPE as well as the direct payments to small bid businesses and others to be able to stay open, to be able to keep their people employed. That is something that’s going to increase as time moves. And lastly, we’re going to need to make sure that we’re in a position that we can provide for the opportunity or for people to begin to go back to work and get new jobs, developing infrastructure.
I don’t think it’s a honeymoon at all. I think it’s a nightmare that everybody’s going through and they all say it’s got to end. It’s not a honeymoon. They’re not doing me a favor. I’ll ask you a rhetorical question. I don’t expect you to answer. And that is, do you think that Republicans were losing their businesses? Do you think Republican constituents out there who can’t pay their mortgage, do you think they’re not letting their Republican representatives know they got a problem? Do you think the person who just lost a family member and is worried about losing another one who happens to be a Republican, a staunch Republican, isn’t telling his or her Republican Senator or state representative, “You’ve got to help. You’ve got to get something done”? Do you think all those people who are making judgements of whether or not my child will be able to go to school and I have to stay home and I can’t go to work therefore I have no income are all Democrats?
I think there’s just been a dawning here. And look, you have a different team in town. You have a different team in town. I’m not going to villainize the opposition, but I’m going to stand and say, “This is what we got to do.” Because they know it. They know it. It’s not like I’m saying what we want to do is we want to make sure that we are going to sign a new trade agreement with A, B or C. This is life and death. That’s why I believe we’ll get it done.
The answer is, first of all, we’ve gone faster than everybody in the total cabinet. So we-The whole cabinet?Whole cabinet?I do. I didn’t want to raise them though. But look, we’re looking for a team who will instill the greatest confidence in the professionals at DOJ to know once again that there is no politics, there’s no politics. As you know, there’s been a great debate about in every single appointment, whether or not people there are enough African-Americans, enough Hispanics, enough Asian Pacific Americans, enough people who are new and young. So we’re just working through it. It’s not by design. There’s not an obvious choice in my mind.There’s not an obvious choice in my mind.Excuse me. Not just because he’s left office, because it’s all becoming obvious exactly what’s at stake.I’m like a real lame duck. Just watch me. Just watch me. I’ve been saying this from the very beginning. Look, let’s just get the work, from this point on for the next several years, there is one objective. And it’s not my political future, it’s bettering the circumstances for the average American. That’s what it’s all about. And I want to communicate to the American people what I hope they already understand about me. It’s about them, it’s not about me. It’s not about me.Well, we’ll see. I don’t know. I mean, I’m not a fortune teller, but I can tell you that the calls I’ve gotten from sitting Republicans in powerful positions, they know me. They know I level with them. They know I never mislead. They know I tell them the truth. And they know I don’t go out of my way to try to embarrass.There are other areas. I’m not sure it’s relevant whether the public should be aware of. Look, what I’m trying to do is pull together the political parties that are in the Congress that know that we’re facing four serious crises. And we have to address all of them. None of us will get all we want, but we can make real progress. And so my focus is on uniting, not emphasizing the divisions. Thank you.Let’s get something straight, will land on my doorstep. His failure will land on my doorstep.Okay.I can’t ensure it, but I can demand, based on the experts both here and among our allies, what is needed to find that out. It may cost literally billions of dollars to secure our cyberspace. It may take a great deal to get it done. First and foremost, it takes people who are knowledgeable and vigilant about what is happening and how it’s happening. And so I’m just going to do all that need be done. All that need be done to determine, A, the extent of the damage. B, the nature of how it occurred. C, what I should be doing internally in terms of my administration to protect against it in the future. And number four, getting together with our allies to try to set up an international system of what constitutes appropriate behavior in cyberspace and get us all to get to the point where we all hold any other country liable for their breaking out of those basic roles.
Of course I can’t. I don’t know what the state of them is. They’re clearly not safe right now. And then between now and January 20th, the likelihood of my being able to garner all the information, the extent and depth of the violations, exactly how the codes or how were breached, what was breached, what was done, is not within my power to do that. But it will be an overwhelming focus for my administration.I already started discussing these issues with the president of Mexico and our friends in Latin America. And the timeline is to do it so that we, in fact, make it better, not worse. The last thing we need is to say we’re going to stop immediately the access to asylum the way it’s being run and end up with two million people on our border. It’s a matter of setting up the guardrails so we can move the direction. I will accomplish what I said I would do, a much more humane policy based on family unification. But it requires getting a lot in place and requires getting the funding to get it in place, including just asylum judges, for example. So it’s a matter of it will get done and it will get done quickly. But it’s not going to be able to be done on day one, lift every restriction that exists and find out that and go back to what it was 20 years ago and all of a sudden find out we have a crisis on our hand that complicates what we’re trying to do.I say trust me. Look at me. I’ve never told them anything I haven’t done. I’m working with them now. We’re dealing with some of those very organizations as we speak. And I will do what I said. It’s going to take not day one, it’s going to take probably the next six months to put that in place.Thank you. Merry Christmas, everybody. Thank you.Yes, yes, yes. God love you, man. You’re a one horse pony. I tell you. Thank you. Thank you. I promise you, my Justice Department will be totally on its own in making its judgments about how they should proceed. Thank you.
Your patience is commendable. We knew this was going to go long, but who knew we’re going to go into maybe tomorrow morning, maybe even longer. But look, we feel good about where we are. We really do. I’m here to tell you tonight, we believe we’re on track to win this election. We knew because of the unprecedented early vote and the mail-in vote it was going to take a while. We’re going to have to be patient until the hard work of tallying the votes is finished. And it ain’t over until every vote is counted, every ballot is counted.
But we’re feeling good. We’re feeling good about where we are. We believe one of the nets has suggested we’ve already won Arizona, but we’re confident about Arizona. That’s a turnaround. We also just called it for Minnesota. And we’re still in the game in Georgia, although that’s not one we expected. And we’re feeling real good about Wisconsin and Michigan. And by the way, it’s going to take time to count the votes, we’re going to win Pennsylvania.
I’ve been talking to the folks in Philly, Allegheny County, Scranton, and they’re really encouraged by the turnout and what they see. Look, we can know the results as early as tomorrow morning. But it may take a little longer. As I’ve said all along, it’s not my place or Donald Trump’s place to declare who’s won this election. That’s the decision of the American people. But I’m optimistic about this outcome. And I want to thank everyone of you who came out and voted in this election. And by the way, Chris Coons and the Democrats, congratulations here in Delaware.
Pardon?
Hey John, you’re the gov. Yeah, the whole team man. You’ve done a great job. I’m grateful to the poll workers, to our volunteers, our canvassers, everyone that participated in this democratic process. And I’m grateful to all of my supporters here in Delaware and all across the nation. Thank you, thank you, thank you. And folks, you heard me say it before, every time I walk out of my grandpa’s house up in Scranton he’d yell, “Joey. Keep the faith.” And my Grandma, when she was alive, “Y’all know Joey spread it.” Keep the faith guys, we’re going to win this. Thank you, thank you, thank you. Your patience is great.
Good evening, my fellow Americans. Over the past few weeks, officials in each state, commonwealth, and district, without regard to party or political preference have certified their winning candidate. Today, the members of the Electoral College representing the certified winner, cast their votes for President and Vice President of the United States in an act just as old as our nation itself. And once again in America, the rule of law, our Constitution and the will of the people prevailed. Our democracy pushed, tested, threatened, proved to be resilient, true and strong. The Electoral College votes which occurred today effect the fact that even in the face of a public health crisis unlike anything we’ve experienced in our lifetime, the people voted. They voted in record numbers. More Americans voted this year than have ever voted in the history of the United States of America. Over 155 million Americans were determined to have their voices heard and their votes counted. In the start of this pandemic, this crisis, many were wondering how many Americans would actually vote at all. But those fears proved to be unfounded. We saw something very few predicted, even thought possible, the biggest voter turnout in the history of the United States of America, a number so big that this election now ranks as the clearest demonstration of the true will of the American people, one of the most amazing demonstrations of civic duty we’ve ever seen in our country.
It should be celebrated, not attacked. More than 81 million of those votes were casts for me and Vice President-elect Harris. That too is a record. More than any ticket has received in the history of America. It represents a winning margin of more than seven million votes over the number of votes cast for my opponent. Together, the Vice President-elect Harris and I earned 306 electoral votes, well exceeding the 270 electoral votes needed to secure victory. 306 electoral votes is the same number of electoral votes that Donald Trump and Vice President Pence received when they won in 2016, excuse me. At the time, President Trump calls the Electoral College tally a landslide. By his own standards. These numbers represented a clear victory then, and I respectfully suggest they do so now. If anyone didn’t know before, they know now. What beats deep in the hearts of the American people is this, democracy, the right to be heard, to have your vote counted, to choose leaders of this nation, to govern ourselves.
In America, politicians don’t take power, people grant power to them. The flame of democracy was lit in this nation a long time ago. And we now know nothing, not even a pandemic or an abuse of power can extinguish that flame. And as the people kept it a flame, so too did courageous state and local officials, and election workers. American democracy works because America makes it work at a local level. One of the extraordinary things we saw this year was that every day Americans, our friends and our neighbors, often volunteers, Democrats, Republicans, Independents, demonstrating absolute courage, they showed a deep and unwavering faith in and a commitment to the law. They did their duty in the face of the pandemic. And then they could not and would not give credence to what they knew was not true. They knew this election was overseen, was overseen by them. It was honest, it was free and it was fair.
They saw it with their own eyes and they wouldn’t be bullied into saying anything different. It was truly remarkable because so many of these patriotic Americans are subject to so much, enormous political pressure, verbal abuse, and even threats of physical violence. While we all wish that our fellow Americans in these positions will always show such courage and commitment to free and fair elections, it is my sincere hope we never again see anyone subjected to the kind of threats and abuse we saw in this election. It’s simply unconscionable. We owe these public servants a debt of gratitude. They didn’t seek the spotlight, and our democracy survived because of them, which is proof once more that it’s everyday America and infused with honor, character and decency that is the heart of this nation.
You know, in this election, their integrity was matched by their strength, independence, and the integrity of our judicial system. In America, when questions are raised about the legitimacy of any election, those questions are resolved through the legal processes. And that’s precisely what happened here. The Trump campaign brought dozens and dozens and dozens of legal challenges to test the result. They were heard again and again, and each of the time they were heard, they were found to be without merit. Time and again, President Trump’s lawyers presented arguments to state officials, state legislatures, state and federal courts, and ultimately to the United States Supreme Court twice. They were heard by more than 80 judges across this country. And in every case, no cause or evidence was found to reverse or question or dispute the results.
A few states went for recounts. All the counts were confirmed. The results in Georgia were counted three times. It didn’t change the outcome. The recount conducted Wisconsin actually saw our margin grow. The margin we had in Michigan was 14 times the margin President Trump won that state by four years ago. Our margin in Pennsylvania was nearly twice the size of the Trump margin four years ago. And yet none of this has stopped baseless claims about the legitimacy of the results.
Even more stunning, 17 Republican Attorneys General, and 126 Republican members of the Congress, actually, they actually signed onto a lawsuit filed by the state of Texas. That lawsuit asked the United States Supreme Court to reject the certified vote counts in Georgia, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. This legal maneuver was an effort by elected officials and one group of states to try to get the Supreme Court to wipe out the votes of more than 20 million Americans in other states. And to hand the presidency to a candidate who lost the Electoral College, lost the popular vote, and lost each and every one of the states whose votes they were trying to reverse.
It’s a position so extreme, we’ve never seen it before. And position that refused to respect the will of the people, refused to respect the rule of law, and refused to honor our Constitution. Thankfully, a unanimous Supreme Court immediately and completely rejected this effort. The Court sent a clear signal to President Trump that they would be no part of an unprecedented assault on our democracy. Every single avenue was made available to President Trump to contest the results. He took full advantage of each and every one of those avenues. President Trump was denied no course of action he wanted to take. He took his case to Republican governors and Republican Secretary of State as he criticized many of them, to Republican state legislature, to Republican appointed judges at every level. And then the case decided after the Supreme Court’s latest rejection, a judge appointed by President Trump wrote, “This court has allowed the plaintiff the chance to make his case and he has lost on the merits.” Lost on the merits.
Even President Trump’s own cybersecurity chief, overseeing our elections, said it was the most secure election in American history, and summarily is let go. Let me say it again. His own cybersecurity chief overseeing this election said it was the most secure in American history.
You know, respecting the will of the people is at the heart of our democracy, even we find those results hard to accept. But that’s the obligation of those who’ve taken on a sworn duty to uphold the Constitution. Four years ago, when I was a sitting Vice President of the United States, it was my responsibility to announce the tally of the Electoral College votes of the joint session of Congress, had voted to elect Donald Trump. I did my job. And I’m pleased but not surprised by the number of my former Republican colleagues in the Senate who have acknowledged already the results of the Electoral College. I thank them. And I’m convinced we can work together for the good of the nation on many subjects. That’s the duty owed to the people, to our Constitution, to our history.
You know, in this battle for the soul of America, democracy prevailed. We the people voted, faith in our institutions held, the integrity of our elections remains intact. And now it’s time to turn the page as we’ve done throughout our history, to unite, to heal. As I said in this campaign, I will be president for all Americans. I’ll work just as hard for those of who you didn’t vote for me as I will for those who did. There’s urgent work in front of us. Getting this pandemic under control and getting the nation vaccinated against this virus, delivering immediate economic help so badly needed by so many Americans who are hurting today, and then building our economy back better than it ever was.
In doing so, we need to work together to give each other a chance to lower the temperature. And most of all, we need to stand in solidarity as fellow Americans, to see each other, our pain, our struggles, our hopes, and our dreams. We’re a great nation. We’re good people. We may come from different places, hold different beliefs, but we share in common a love for this country, a belief in its limitless possibilities. For we, the United States of America, has always set the example for the world for a peaceful transition of power. We’ll do so again. I know the task before us won’t be easy. It’s tempered by the pain so many of us are feeling.
Today, our nation passed a grim milestone, 300,000 deaths to this COVID virus. My heart goes out to each of you in this dark winter of the pandemic, about to spend the holidays and the new year with a black hole in your hearts, without the ones you loved at your side. My heart goes out to all of you who have fallen on hard times through no fault of your own, unable to sleep at night, staring at the ceiling, weighed down by the worry of what tomorrow will bring for you and equally important for your family.
But we faced difficult times before in our history. I know we’ll get through this one, but together. That’s how we get through it together. So as we start the hard work to be done, may this moment give us a strength to rebuild this house of ours upon a rock that can never be washed away. As in the Prayer of St. Francis, for where there is discord, union, where there is doubt, faith where there is darkness, light. This is who we are as a nation. This is the America we love and that is the America we’re going to be. So thank you all and may God bless you. And may God protect our troops and all of those who stand watch over our democracy. Thank you.
Thanks for the congratulations, appreciate it.
Senator Harris and I just completed briefings on both COVID and the economic crisis facing this nation, and we’re reminded again of the severity of this pandemic. Cases are on the rise nationwide and we’re nearing 240,000 deaths due to COVID, and our hearts go out to each and every family has lost a loved one to this terrible disease.
In America, the vote is sacred. It’s how people of this nation express their will, and it is the will of the voters, no one, not anything else, that chooses the President of the United States of America. So each ballot must be counted and that’s what we’re going to see going through now, and that’s how it should be.
Democracy is sometimes messy. It sometimes requires a little patience as well, but that patience has been rewarded now for more than 240 years with a system of governance, and that’s been the envy of the world, and we continue to feel, senator and I, we continue to feel very good about where things stand.
We have no doubt that when the count is finished, Senator Harris and I will be declared the winners. So I ask everyone to stay calm, all people to stay calm. The process is working. The count is being completed and we’ll know very soon. So thank you all for your patience, but we’ve got to count the votes. God bless you all and may God protect our troops. Thank you so much.
Good afternoon, folks. Thanks for being here. Earlier today, the November jobs report was released and it was grim. It shows an economy that’s stalling and we remain in the midst of one of the worst economic and job crises in modern history. But it doesn’t have to stay that way. If we act now. Now, I mean now, we can begin to regain momentum and start to build back a better future. There’s no time to lose.
Millions of people have lost their jobs or had their hours slashed. They’ve lost their health insurance or are in danger of losing their health insurance. One in every six renters is behind in rent. One in four small businesses can’t keep their doors open. And there’s a growing gap in Black and Latino unemployment and the gap remains much too large.
And it’s deeply troubling that last month’s drop in overall unemployment was driven by people who were dropping out of the job market, not because more people were being hired. Dropping out of the job market altogether. They’ve lost hope of finding a job or they’ve taken full-time caregiving responsibilities as child centers remain closed and their children learn remotely.
Over the past three months, 2. 3 million more people are long-term unemployed, meaning for 23 weeks or more. By far the largest increase on record. This is a dire jobs report. It’s a snapshot, I might remind you, up to mid-November. Before the surge in COVID cases many predicted and the deaths rise that we’ve seen in December, as we head into a very dark winter ahead. For example, since October, cities are down 21,000 educators, just as schools need more help in fighting against the pandemic. A couple of days ago, I spoke with a school crossing guard, a server, a restaurant owner and a stagehand. Good people. Honorable people. Decent, hard-working Americans from across the country. It reminded me of my dad, who lost-
… across the country. It reminded me of my dad who lost his job in Scranton and eventually moved our family to Delaware, just outside of Wilmington, a place called Claymont. He used to say, you’ve heard me say it before, “Joey, I don’t expect the government to solve my problems, but I expect them at least to understand my problems.” The folks I’m talking about, the folks out there aren’t looking for a handout. They just need help. They are in trouble through no fault of their own. Nothing they did caused them to have hours cut or lose their job or drop out of the market. What they need, they need us to understand. We’re in a crisis. We need to come together as a nation. We need the Congress to act and act now.
If Congress and President Trump fail to act by the end of December, 12 million Americans will lose their unemployment benefits they rely on. Merry Christmas. The unemployment they rely on to keep food on the table, keep the lights on and the heat on, pay their bills. Emergency paid leave will end. Moratorium on evictions will expire. States will lose the vital tools they need to pay for COVID testing and public health. Put yourselves in that position, anybody listening, laying awake at night, wondering what’s going to happen tomorrow. It’s going to be harder for states to keep children and educators safe in schools, to try to provide assistance to keep small businesses alive. States and cities are already facing large, large budget shortfalls this year. Again, through no fault of their own. They’ve already laid off more than a million workers. Even more teachers, firefighters, cops will lose their jobs unless federal government steps shut up now. All of this weakens our ability to control the virus if we don’t step up now.
Emergency paid leave reduces the spread of COVID because it allows people to stay home when they’re sick. States and cities need funding to direct their COVID response, which is the only way we’re going to end the economic crisis as well, the only way we’re going to get people back to work. I’m not alone in saying this situation is urgent. If we don’t act now, the future will be very bleak.
Americans need help and they need it now. And they need more to come early next year. But I must tell you, I am encouraged by the bipartisan efforts in the Senate around $900 billion package for relief. It’s a bipartisan effort. When Congress, as they work out the details of this relief package, they’re going to have to focus on resources for direct public health responses to COVID-19. We need meaningful funding for vaccines now. So don’t lose time and leave people waiting for additional months. We need serious funding for testing now. We need to ramp up testing to allow our schools and business to operate safely.
The sooner we pass the funding, the sooner we can turn the corner on COVID-19. In the week since this election ended, there were questions about whether Democrats and Republicans could work together. I know many of you are skeptical about my view that they will and can. Right now, they are showing they can. Congress and President Trump have to get this deal done for the American people. But any package passed in the lame duck session is not going to be enough overall. It’s critical, but it’s just a start. Congress are going to need to act again in January.
Earlier today, I consulted a number of my economic team, most of which have been announced by now, and Vice President Harris and I announced that team last week. As we inherit the public health and economic crisis, we’re working on a plan that we’ll put forward for the next Congress to move fast to control the pandemic, to revive the economy, and to build back better than before. We hope to see the same kind of spirit of bipartisanship and cooperation as we’re seeing today. Our plan is based on the input from a broad range of people the Vice President Elect and I have been meeting with since winning this election last month, labor leaders, the leading CEOs in the country, mayors and governors of both parties, parents, educators, workers, small business owners. There’s a consensus that as we battle COVID-19, we have to make sure the businesses and workers had the tools, the resources, and the guidance and the health and safety standards to keep businesses and schools open safely. It can be done. Because here’s the deal, the fight against COVID won’t be won in January alone. To truly end this crisis, Congress is going to need to fund more testing as well as a more equitable and free distribution of the vaccine. We need more economic relief to bridge through 2021 until this pandemic and economic crisis are over. And then we need to build back better. I’ve said it before. An independent analysis by Moody’s, a well-respected Wall Street firm, projects that my bill bag better plan would create 18.6 million good paying jobs. It’s based on a simple premise. Reward work in America, not wealth.
We’re going to invest in infrastructure, clean energy and manufacturing, and so much more. We’ll create millions of good paying American jobs and get the job market back in the path to full employment. This will raise income, reduce drug prices, advance racial equity across the economy, and restore the backbone of this country, the middle-class.
Look, the bottom line, it’s essential. We provide immediate relief for working families and businesses now, not just help them get to the other side of this painful crisis, but avoid a much broader economic cost due to long-term unemployment and businesses failing. By acting now, even with deficit financing, we can add to growth in the near future. In fact, economic research shows that with conditions like the crisis today, especially with such low interest rates, not taking action, the action I’m proposing, will hurt the economy, scar the workforce, reduce growth and add to the national debt.
Look, I know times are tough. The challenges are daunting. But I know we can do this. We can create an economic recovery for all, for everybody. We can move from crisis to recovery and to resurgence. For Lord’s sake, this is the United States of America. We’ve done it before and we’ll do it again. We will. I promise you. So I thank the bipartisan group that is trying to put something together right now. We’re going to need more bipartisanship as we move on. God bless you guys and the women are doing this. God bless our country. And may God protect our troops. I’ll stop there and I’d be happy to take some questions.
Speaker 2: (19:07)
Mr. President Elect, one of the biggest tasks that you will have when you enter office is distributing a vaccine. Your team has started to meet with the Trump Administration to learn of their plans as you are set to inherit this task. Are you satisfied with the current plans that are underway for distributing that vaccine? Do you feel that the federal government is doing enough at this point? And what steps do you think need to be taken between now and when those first vaccines go out?
Well, there’s a lot more that has to be done. They’ve clued us into their planning on how they plan to distribute the actual vaccine to the various states. But there is no detailed plan, that we’ve seen anyway, as to how you get the vaccine out of a container into an injection syringe into somebody’s arm. And it’s going to be very difficult for that to be done and it’s a very expensive proposition. For example, we agree with their priorities that they’ve laid out so far. I do, at least. My team is looking at it, of dealing with first responders and those in nursing homes and in home care, the first people on the list. But we also have to realize that we’re in a situation where there has to be some equity in the way this is distributed.
And that requires, for example, right now we’re in a situation where you have the leading cause of death for all Americans this week is COVID-19. Well, blacks and Latinos are three times as likely to die if they get COVID-19. And so the communities of color, it’s a mass casualty event. And so we got to figure out how we make sure we get the vaccine to those communities, delivering large amounts of the vaccine to the Walmarts and other major drug chains does not get you into a lot of these neighborhoods. And it doesn’t guarantee that it gets around. So we got a lot of work to do. And the equity side of this has to be important part of distribution.
In addition to that, the cost of actually getting the serum into an injection, into a needle into somebody’s arm costs a lot of money. It takes a lot of people. It takes a lot of folks to be able to get that done. And we have to have a much better way than we’ve seen thus far as to how it’s distributed. In some states, like the governor of Utah said, “Just deliver to the Capitol. I can take care of it,” in our conversation. Well, that could be true. But in large states like California, Texas, Illinois, Florida, et cetera, it’s just not that easy. There has to be an overall plan. That’s what we’re working on right now. And that’s why I-
… Overall plan. That’s what we’re working on right now. And that’s why I asked Dr. Fauci to stay on and to be my chief advisor on this issue, but also to be part of the COVID team.
Look, it’s each one of these groups’ jobs to push their leaders to make sure there’s a greater diversity. What I can promise you is when this is all said and done, you see everyone that I’ve announced and it was going to be in the next several weeks, we’ll have it all out there, you’re going to see significant diversity. I’m not going to tell you now exactly what I’m going to do in any department, but I promise you it will be the single most diverse cabinet based on race, color, based on gender, that’s ever existed in the United States of America.Commitment of what I just said. It’ll be the most diverse cabinet in the main spots in both White House, as well as the cabinet positions.Well, it would be kind of stupid for me to tell you what I did, wouldn’t it? Because it’d be kind of hard to do it again. I told you all that I was confident I can get a bipartisan agreement on this stuff. And I think we will not just on this package, but I think beyond. And the last thing I’m going to do is tell you strategically how I go about this. I remember I used to get asked the same thing when I was putting together significant deals between Democrats and Republicans when I was a Senator and vice-president. It’s just not a very smart thing for… It’s like me asking you, “Tell me how you get your sources and how’d you get those sources you’ve got in order to get that story?” That would be ridiculous for you to tell me or your colleagues how you did it.All I can say is I’m confident there are a sufficient number of Democrats and Republicans in the United States Senate, along with significant votes coming out of the House of Representatives, to put together a serious package that will keep us from going off the edge here, provide the kind of resources have needed immediately. It’s not going to satisfy everybody, but the option is if you insist on everything, we’re likely to get nothing on both sides. And so I think they’re on their way to being able to come up with a package that meets the basic, immediate needs that we have. But I’ve made it real clear, it’s just a down payment. This is not the end of the deal. So I’ve been relatively good at negotiating over my career because I never, number one, reveal something somebody doesn’t want me to in the deal, and number two because I’m always keep my word.Well, that’s not what I understand, but I think it would be better if they had the $1,200 and I understand that may be still in play. But I’m not going to comment on the specific details. The whole purpose of this is we’ve got to make sure people aren’t thrown out of their apartments, lose their homes, are able to have unemployment insurance they can continue to feed their families on as we grow back the economy, be in a position where we provide for help to localities so they’re not continuing to lay off school teachers and firefighters, et cetera, first responders, and to make sure we’re in a position that we’re able to generate the kind of growth that is a consequence of this by allowing…It costs a lot of money to keep schools and businesses open on the COVID side of the equation. They’re all pieces that should be in there. There’s much more if I were writing it, I think the proposal that quite frankly, the HEROES act that the house passed, that’s what I would support. But this is a democracy and you’ve got to find a sweet spot where you have enough people willing to move in a direction that gets us a long way down the road, but isn’t the whole answer.I never start off thinking that way. I always start off, “We can get it done and we’ll get it done.”Well, because the country is going to be in dire, dire, dire straits if they don’tWe’ll be in dire trouble if we don’t get cooperation, I believe we will.
We’re looking at hundreds of billions of dollars. And look, again, I’ve learned after hanging around in this business for a while, the last thing you do before you begin a negotiation is lay down a drop dead marker. “And if it’s not this, I’m not going to talk to you.” I think there’s a lot we can get done and I think people are going to see the overwhelming necessity. What’s going to start to happen is a lot of folks who represent Republican districts are going to find their Republican neighbors are in real trouble as things get worse. They’re going to find that a there’s an overwhelming need as these numbers skyrocket. You remember my saying that I believe the experts, we’d have at least another 250 dead before the end of the year? And they went, “Oh, no.” Guess what? Look what’s happening.
It’s going to get much worse. It’s going to get much worse. And so I believe that there are enough Republicans who will join enough Democrats in the United States Senate to get a majority along with the House to get it done. But we’ll see. We’ll see, this is a step at a time.
Well,  executive orders that are totally within the purview of an executive. But one of the things I don’t like is I don’t like people saying that I can, by executive order, to do the following things, which there is no basis in the constitution suggested can be done. So there are certain things I can do. I can issue executive orders, pulling back some of the executive orders that Trump put forward. But I can’t issue an executive order saying, “We’re going to spend X billion dollars on this issue,” without getting the Congress appropriates and who’s responsible for distributing that money.
There are a lot of people I’m looking to convince people in the task force and the task force will continue to be expanded with really fine people. And look, I think actions of presidents matter, and I’m going to say something that I think the African-American community, Latino community have known, and I’ve never misrepresented anything to them. And that if, as you all keep pointing out, I’m the oldest president ever elected, although I’m actually only 47. But all kidding aside, I think that my taking the vaccine and people seen me take that vaccine is going to give some confidence. But I said early on, you may remember, I think you may have asked me the question, I may be mistaken. But I said early on that I think one of the things that bothers me the most is by the wild assertions the administration is making about how this was going to go away and inject bleach and all those kinds of things. It was diminishing confidence across the board and the American people overall. But particularly in this administration with the African-American and Latino community, what I hear from my friends in the community and-
… the African-American Latino community. What I hear from my friends in the community, not but blocks from here as we stand, is that we’re not going to be the guinea pigs. We’re not going to be the guinea pigs. Well, the fact of the matter is that they won’t be.
You’re going to see tens of millions of Americans taking the vaccine, and you’re going to see the President of United States and three of the four living former Presidents doing it publicly as well.
It’s going to take some effort to rebuild confidence in science, because it’s been so diminished in this administration thus far. But I will. And by the way, in the meantime, I’m going to make sure that the vaccine is both free and available, and that any follow up on the vaccine is free and available that relates to any health complications from it. So there’s ways we can deal with some of these issues. Biden has good healthcare, but I don’t have good healthcare. That’s another thing we’re working on from day one. I’ve been working on it at this moment. And so my hope is that we can reinstill some confidence and be able to believe the President of the United States when he or she speaks.
Well, first and foremost thing is we’re going to follow again, the science and the recommendation of the experts on keeping people safe. So it is highly unlikely there’ll be a million people on the Mall, going all the way down to the Memorial.
I think we’ll see. We’re in discussion with the House leadership and the Senate leadership as to what they plan for the inauguration, particularly those 200,000 spots they control. But I think you’re going to see something that’s closer to what the convention was like than the typical inauguration.
First and foremost, my objective is keep America safe, but still allow people to celebrate. To celebrate and see one another celebrating. And so we’re in consultation. My team is in consultation with folks who help us put on the convention as well as with our colleagues, Republican and Democratic colleagues in charge of the inauguration.
My guess is there probably will not be a gigantic inaugural parade down Pennsylvania Avenue. But my guess is you’ll see a lot of virtual activity in states all across America, engaging even more people than before. But that’s in train now. And I’m not in a position to give you an example of exactly what it will look like. But I promise you, it’ll be available either virtually or in person for many. And my guess is it’ll still be some, there’ll still be a platform ceremony, but I don’t know exactly how it’s all going to work out. The key is keeping people safe.
I can’t do a super version of the President’s announcement in the Rose Garden nationwide. So it’s going to have to be more imaginative. But I think, like I said, I think the convention we put on really opened up avenues that we never thought existed.
And I doubt whether there’ll be another democratic, at least the democratic convention, that it’s a straight like it always has been. I think we include more people. People want to celebrate. People want to be able to say, we’ve passed the baton. We’re moving on. Democracy has functioned. I wish I could tell you more, but as those decisions are made, they’ll be announced.
I don’t think I have to convince him of that. He knows me. He knows I’m as straight as an arrow when I negotiate. He knows I keep commitments and I never attempt to embarrass the opposition.
There are some things that I think are just ready for the kind of compromise that Democrats and Republicans are prepared to engage in absent the present President of the United States’ attitudes on some of these issues. Infrastructure, dealing with health issues, dealing with the fight against cancer, dealing with education. I think there’s a number of things.
As I said before, we’ve got to take the vitriol out of politics. I know there’s a lot of people on both sides who want to continue to go after and punish the opposition. I get that. I get the fact that an awful lot of Americans are disappointed I was elected President.
Fortunately, there’s 7 million more that were happy than disappointed, but I get that. And there’s a lot of Democrats who are angry and want to strike back at republicans. What I’ve said from the beginning, and I think I’ve conducted myself this way throughout my career. I learned that early lesson. It’s always appropriate to question other man or woman’s judgment, but never their motive.
Once you question their motive, then in fact, there’s no way to get to go. You’re in the pocket of the cement industry, let’s do a deal on highways. With no possibility. And so when I’ve dealt with Mitch McConnell in the past as a Vice President or as a Senator, we haven’t engaged in that activity. It doesn’t mean we can get to an agreement.
I’m not asking anybody to abandon their principles, but I do think it makes no sense to engage in vitriol and trying to get the place where I can’t believe that a majority of the Republicans don’t understand we need a new infrastructure in America.
If there was nothing to do with jobs or a green economy, there’s too many bridges that are going to collapse. Too many roads in disrepair. Too many Republican states that every time it floods, their water systems are polluted. These are common problems and I’m confident, it’s going to be hard, but I’m confident we can get to agreement on a number of things that will be of consequence. Thank you all so very, very much.
No, I don’t think it should be mandatory. I wouldn’t demand it to be mandatory, but I would do everything in my power, just like I don’t think mass have to be made mandatory nationwide, I’ll do everything in my power as the President of United States to encourage people to do the right thing.
And when they do it, demonstrate that it matters. That’s why I said in my inaugural speech, I’m going to ask people to commit for 100 days to wear a mask. Not because I’m asking it for any reason to punish. This is not a political issue. It’s become one.
But if people do it for 100 days in the middle of what will be still a raging crisis, and the vaccine is able to be distributed, they are going to see deaths drop off the edge. They’re going to see hundreds of thousands of people not getting sick.
And my hope is they’ll be then inclined to say, okay, it’s worth the patriotic duty to go ahead and protect other people. Thank you all so very much. Thank you.
Good afternoon, everyone. Kamala and I we’re here to make a brief statement and I’m sure we’ll have more to say later and either tonight or tomorrow, but let me begin by thanking the press for being here and thank you to everyone else. My fellow Americans, yesterday, once again proved that democracy is the heartbeat of this nation. [inaudible 00:03:32] has been the heartbeat of this nation for two centuries. And even in the face of pandemic, more Americans voted this election than ever before in American history. Over 150 million people cast their votes. I think that’s just extraordinary. And if we had any doubts, we shouldn’t have any longer, about a government of, by, and for the people. It’s very much alive, very much alive in America. Here, the people rule. Power can’t be taken or asserted. It flows from the people. And is their will that determines who will be the President of the United States and their will alone.
And now after a long night of counting, it’s clear that we’re winning enough states to reach 270 electoral votes needed to win the presidency. I’m not here to declare that we’ve won, but I am here to report when the count is finished, we believe we will be the winners. Of all the votes counted, we have won Wisconsin by 20,000 votes, virtually the same margin that President Trump won that state four years ago. In Michigan, we lead by over 35,000 votes and it’s growing, a substantially bigger margin than President Trump won Michigan in 2016. Michigan will complete its vote soon, maybe as early as today. And I feel very good about Pennsylvania. Virtually all the remaining ballots to be counted are cast by mail. And we’ve been winning 78% of the votes by mail in Pennsylvania. We flipped Arizona and the second district of Nebraska. Of special significance to me is that we’ve won with the majority of the American people.
And every indication is that that majority will grow. We have a popular vote lead of nearly 3 million votes and every indication is that will grow as well. Indeed, Senator Harris and I are on track to win more votes than any ticket in the history of this country that ever won the presidency and vice presidency. Over 70 million votes. I’m very proud of our campaign. Only three presidential campaigns in the past have defeated an incumbent president. When it’s finished, God willing, we’ll be the fourth. This is a major achievement. This is a major achievement. And it’s been a long and difficult campaign, but it’s been a more difficult time for our country, a hard time. We’ve had a hard campaigns before. We’ve faced hard times before. So once the selection is finalized and behind us, it’ll be time for us to do what we’ve always done as Americans, to put the harsh rhetoric of the campaign behind us, to lower the temperature, to see each other again, to listen to one another, to hear each other again, and respect and care for one another, to unite, to heal, to come together as a nation.
I know this won’t be easy. I’m not naive. Neither of us are. I know how deep and hard the opposing views are in our country on so many things. But I also know this as well. To make progress, we have to stop treating our opponents as enemies. We are not enemies. What brings us together as Americans is so much stronger than anything that can tear us apart. So let me be clear. I, we, are campaigning as a Democrats, but I will govern as an American president. The presidency itself is not a partisan institution. It’s the one office in this nation that represents everyone and it demands a duty of care for all Americans. That is precisely what I will do. I will work as hard for those who didn’t vote for me as I will for those who did vote for me. Now, every vote must be counted. No one’s going to take our democracy away from us, not now, not ever. America’s come too far. America’s fought too many battles. America’s endured too much to ever let that happen.
We the people will not be silenced. We the people will not be bullied. We the people will not surrender. My friends, I’m confident we’ll emerge victorious. But this will not be my victory alone or our victory alone. It’ll be a victory for the American people, for our democracy, for America. And there will be no blue states and red states when we win, just the United States of America, God bless you all and may God protect our troops. Thank you.
Good evening, my fellow Americans. We don’t have a final declaration of victory yet but the numbers tell us it’s clear. They tell us a clear and convincing story we’re going to win this race. Just look at what has happened since yesterday. 24 hours we were behind in Georgia, now we’re ahead and we’re going to win that state. 24 hours ago we were behind in Pennsylvania and we are going to win Pennsylvania. And now we’re ahead but we’re winning in Arizona, winning in Nevada, and in fact our lead just doubled in Nevada. We’re on track to over 300 electoral votes, electoral college votes.
And look at the national numbers. We’re going to win this race with a clear majority with the nation behind us. We’ve gotten over 74 million votes. Let me repeat that, 74 million votes, that’s more than any presidential ticket has ever gotten in the history of the United States of America. And our vote total is still growing. We’re beating Donald Trump by over 4 million votes, and that’s a margin that is still growing as well.
One of the things I’m especially proud of is how well we’ve done across America, and we’re going to be the first Democrat to win in Arizona in 24 years. We’re going to be the first Democrat to win Georgia in 28 years, and we’ve rebuilt the blue wall in the middle of the country that crumbled just four years ago. Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin, the heartland of this nation. I know watching these vote tallies on TV moves very slow, and as slow as it goes it can be numbing. But never forget the tallies aren’t just numbers, they represent votes and voters, men and women who exercised their fundamental right to have their voice heard.
And what’s becoming clear each hour is that a record number of Americans of all races, faiths religions chose change over more of the same. They’ve given us a mandate for action on COVID, the economy, climate change, systemic racism. They
